thesis/troff/README.md, before:


This archive contains the TROFF source for of my thesis entitled "Four-Space
Visualization of 4D Objects". The following files are included:

    README .......... This file.
    makefile ........ This makefile should be easily modified for your environ.
    title ........... Title page & approval page.
    abstract ........ Abstract and acknowledgements.
    chapter1 ........ Thesis chapter
    chapter2 ........       \
    chapter3 ........       /
    chapter4 ........       \
    chapter5 ........       /
    chapter6 ........ Thesis chapter
    references ...... Articles, books & papers referred to from the thesis.
    appendix ........ Thesis appendix (notes on implementation).
    pageinfo ........ The generated pagination code.
    thesis.macros ... General macros for the thesis.
    4dv.macros ...... eqn macros that are helpful for my mathematical notation.
    toc.macros ...... Macros for constructing the table of contents.
    lof.macros ...... Macros for constructing the list of figures.

Note that if you have a PostScript printer you can pick up the already-generated
PostScript verision of this thesis from the PostScript directory.

Commit message:

Convert thesis/troff/REAMDE to Markdown

thesis/troff/README.md, after:

`ray4/thesis/troff/`
====================================================================================================

This archive contains the TROFF source for of my thesis _Four-Space Visualization of 4D Objects_.

The following files are included:

    README.md ....... This file
    4dv.macros ...... TROFF macros for mathematical notation
    lof.macros ...... TROFF Macros for constructing the list of figures
    thesis.macros ... TROFF macros for the thesis source
    toc.macros ...... TROFF macros for constructing the table of contents
    makefile ........ The makefile for creating the various thesis assets
    pageinfo ........ Generated pagination code

    title ........... Title & approval page
    abstract ........ Abstract and acknowledgements
    chapter1 ........ Thesis chapter 1
    chapter2 ........ Thesis chapter 2
    chapter3 ........ Thesis chapter 3
    chapter4 ........ Thesis chapter 4
    chapter5 ........ Thesis chapter 5
    chapter6 ........ Thesis chapter 6
    appendix ........ Thesis appendix (notes on implementation)
    references ...... Referenced articles, books & papers

Generated PostScript files can be found in the peer directory `../PostScript/`.
